---
title: Blogs I Read
summary: A number of blogs which inspired this one.
---

I was inspired to start this blog by the many other programmers who also blog.
Here's a list of some of the people whose blogs I'd recommend you have a look
at!

Let me know if there are more any programming blogs you'd recommend.

## Jon Skeet

[https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/)

Jon Skeet is well-known as a C# expert and the man with the highest reputation
on [Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/). He's also the author of the
excellent [NodaTime](https://nodatime.org/) library, a better date and time API
for .NET than `System.DateTime`.

His blog contains articles on a variety of programming topics, mostly C# and
.NET. Very informative and insightful!

**A good place to start:** Jon's [Edulinq series of
posts](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2011/02/23/reimplementing-linq-to-objects-part-45-conclusion-and-list-of-posts/),
where he re-implements LINQ, are an excellent way of getting your head round
LINQ, especially in terms of understanding the delayed evaluation feature.

## Matthew Jones (Exception Not Found)

[https://exceptionnotfound.net/](https://exceptionnotfound.net/)

Matthew Jones is a software developer from Arizona who posts mainly about web
development in .NET. His articles are interesting and informative.

**A good place to start:** The [Daily Software
Anti-Pattern](https://exceptionnotfound.net/tag/daily-antipattern/) is a series
of posts examining "anti-patterns", that is, solutions to problems that you
should avoid using!

## Chris Alcock (The Morning Brew)

[http://blog.cwa.me.uk/](http://blog.cwa.me.uk/)

Every weekday, Chris posts a roundup of many posts to do with programming,
focussing on .NET. He calls this "The Morning Brew", and I've found it a great
way to get an overview of what's going on in the .NET world. It's also a great
way to discover new blogs; I found out about some of the other blogs on this
list through the Morning Brew!

He's just started posting again after a few months' hiatus after the birth of
his daughter, so now's a good time to start reading!

## Eric Lippert (Fabulous adventures in coding)

[https://ericlippert.com/](https://ericlippert.com/)

Eric Lippert currently works at Facebook but used to be on the C# language
design team at Microsoft. Obviously this means his posts are often about C# and
.NET; that said, there is insight for programmers not familiar with those
technologies.

**A good place to start:** Eric has [recently been
blogging](https://ericlippert.com/2019/01/31/fixing-random-part-1/) about how he
dislikes the `System.Random` class and how he would improve it. At the time of
writing he's still releasing posts in the series.

## Troy Hunt

[https://www.troyhunt.com/](https://www.troyhunt.com/)

Troy Hunt is a web security expert from the Gold Coast in Australia. He
regularly blogs about many topics surrounding security, both from the point of
view of developers and end users of software. He also runs the [Have I Been
Pwned](https://haveibeenpwned.com/) website, which aggregates billions of
records exposed in data breaches and encourages people to adopt more secure
practices.

**A good place to start:** Every week Troy releases a video update on what he's
been up to and what's been happening in the world of online security. He posts
these on his [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/troyhuntdotcom), but
there's also an audio version released at the same time, which I often listen to
on the way to work!

## Mark Heath (Sound Code)

[https://markheath.net/](https://markheath.net/)

Mark Heath is a .NET developer from the UK, and is the author of many open
source libraries, including NAudio (an audio and MIDI library for .NET). His
favourite topics include Azure, LINQ, audio programming and web development.
He's also an Arsenal fan like me!

**A good place to start:** The [Lunchtime
LINQ](https://markheath.net/category/linq-challenge) challenges are a fun way to
improve your skills with LINQ.
