---
title: "ProcGen Fun 1: Distributions"
summary: Introducing distributions as a way of abstracting randomness.
---

_This post is part of a [series about procedural generation and functional
programming](/2024/12/05/PGF-00/). The source code for **this** post can be
found [here](https://github.com/djcarter85/ProcGenFun/tree/post-01)._

To start off, I've created a Visual Studio solution and two C# projects:

- [ProcGenFun](https://github.com/djcarter85/ProcGenFun/tree/post-01/ProcGenFun)
  will contain the core code and will strictly follow functional programming
  principles.
- [ProcGenFun.WinForms](https://github.com/djcarter85/ProcGenFun/tree/post-01/ProcGenFun.WinForms)
  is a Windows forms application which will enable us to visualise the results
  of our functional core. This project will contain some imperative code.

## Distributions

Right off the bat, if we're going to express randomness in a functional way then
we need to abstract it somehow. For this we're going to use the
`IDistribution<T>` interface from the NuGet package [RandN](https://randn.dev/).

```cs
public interface IDistribution<T>
{
    T Sample<TRng>(TRng rng);
}
```

(Aside: there's also a `TrySample()` method on this interface, which we will be
largely ignoring during this series.)

This represents a source of random values corresponding to some probability
distribution. The key thing you can do with a distribution is sample a value
from it, given some source of randomness (the `rng` in the above definition).

Calling `Sample()` is an impure operation, because the value we pass in contains
the state of the (psuedo-)random number generator which gets modified. So in
order to keep our core code functional we can only call `Sample()` from outside
the core library.

## Example

RandN comes with a handful of built-in distributions. A simple example is the
uniform distribution; calling `Uniform.New(0d, 1d)` gives us a uniform
distribution of `double`s between 0 and 1.

given a collection of samples we can make a hist; this is functional so can go
in the core (show code). then in winforms we can take a number of samples and
then plot the histogram

![Histogram of a uniform
distribution](/assets/images/2024-12-06-PGF-01/uniform.png)

As you can see, we've got a broadly uniform spread of values between 0 and 1.

## Dist as a functor

## Manipulating distributions (dist as a monad)

TODO talk about how you can manipulate distributions completely functionally - I
like this abstraction

functor and monad to get normal distribution

```cs
public static class Normal
{
    public static IDistribution<double> New()
    {
        var uniformDist = Uniform.New(0d, 1d);
        return
            from u1 in uniformDist
            from u2 in uniformDist
            select
                Math.Sqrt(-2.0 * Math.Log(u1))
                * Math.Cos(2.0 * Math.PI * u2);
    }
}
```

here's the histogram:

![Histogram of a normal
distribution](/assets/images/2024-12-06-PGF-01/normal.png)

this is encouraging! we e

## Conclusion

something about the next post
