---
title: "ProcGen Fun 6: The Recursive Backtracker algorithm"
summary:
---

[[List of posts](/2024/12/18/PGF-00/#list-of-posts) | [source code for this
post](https://github.com/djcarter85/ProcGenFun/tree/post-06)]

The animation below demonstrates the inner workings of the **Recursive Backtracker**
algorithm, which we're going to learn about in this post.

![Animation of a maze generated using the Recursive Backtracker
algorithm](/assets/images/2025-11-20-PGF-06/maze-animation.gif)

Even just looking at this animation you can probably figure out how this
algorithm works. However, I'll take a little time to define the algorithm as it
introduces a couple of fundamental concepts in TODO

## The algorithm

I'll demonstrate the algorithm using an example. (note: use a small grid!)

To start with, pick a random cell.

pic

Then pick one of its neighbours at random, remove the wall in that direction,
and move to this as your new current cell.

pic

We have a new current cell, so pick another neighbour at random and move to it,
this time making sure we haven't visited that cell before. note how i'm marking
the ones I've visited as I go to make it clear

pic

Repeat the process, each time picking a random unvisited neighbour and moving to
it.

Eventually you'll end up in a situation where you're fenced in and you've
already visited the current cell's neighbours.

pic

At this point, move backwards along the path you took and try again.

pic

In this case, we have a neighbour we can move to, so let's do that and carry on.

pic

Eventually you've visited all the cells, and so you keep going until you have
visited and finished all the cells.

What I love about this algorithm is that it's so intuitive. You can imagine that
the maze grid is a set of brick walls and you're walking through it with a
sledgehammer, keeping a trail of breadcrumbs along the way!

## The code

random walk

then use it

## Maintaining the history

## Results

## Up next

also doesn't depend on the grid being rectangular, which opens up a world of possibility
